Hello everyone.
I'm kind of nervous because it's been three years of no conference on my side so I'm really
happy to be here today because, wow.
Just a quick screencap of what it was like last time Ed was really presented just for
the project because I did a conference like at the last post that was in person and it
was more of a call for collaboration.
I still need collaboration but today's presentation is more like what happened since that moment
which is 2016.
This is what it looks like right now.
For people using it, they're aware but this is it.
This is the plan for the presentation today.
Who I am, what is Ed's, why Ed's, what's new and what's next.
I saw that most of the people here already knows what Ed's is so I will try to go faster
there so that we have more time to talk at the end.
Who I am, I'm Cérie L'Oréon.
I come from Canada.
I started DancerGo Open Technologies in 2017.
This is me.
I'm currently the main S maintainer.
I certified the Privacy Beast and years are passing so fast.
I'm 2019 and since that moment, I'm actually trying my best getting funding and being paid
to actually move the things forward in the mission of facilitating accessibility to security
and confidentiality for most people.
This is a challenge because everybody needs confidentiality and privacy but they're not
necessarily tax-a-d.
The goal of Ed's right now is more to bring it accessible to everyone, reducing the friction
and that's it.
What is Ed's?
Ed's can be seen as two different things.
It's basically a built system, I would say, and the outcome is a runtime environment.
The runtime environment is based on core boot as of now but it could be inside of UEFI and
the DXE but what I'm testing is more core boot payload.
So Ed's right now is more core boot payload and as of now, we will call it a runtime environment.
It's core boot and Linux has a payload.
When you configure core boot, you can configure it like to have Linux as its payload and basically,
like I said before, Ed is the built system preparing the kernel and the init rd.
In the init rd, you have all the tools needed and the scripts which are boot policies which
actually creates the user interface and everything that is behind to make it usable.
Core boot here, Ed does an abstraction outside of the core boot configuration.
And basically, Ed's actually core boot as a configuration that is inside of the GitHub
trees and it defines also the Linux configuration that will be used to define only the needed
kernel modules that will be compiled in and if there is outside modules that are needed,
let's say the wired card or anything else, it's loaded on demand.
So the most important part for us right now is to define Ed's.
This is the only thing I want to say about core boot.
Unfortunately, the openness and ownership and the auditability of the core boot part
of the code will depend on how core boot is open.
As we heard in the previous conference that was given by Michael, we have a problem because
less and less platforms are actually completely open source without blogs.
So unfortunately, we shift the responsibility to the user to define his own threat model
and decide which platform is going to use to attain the privacy and confidentiality
that is there.
The idea here is that if you don't have native initialization of the hardware, if you depend
on FSP and memory initialization blogs, you have to have faith in those blogs to actually
do what is expected.
On the models that we have there, like the IP bridge, again, the laptop, the X230, soon
there's going to be as well the 300, 440 P will be supported with native RAM initialization.
It's coming.
Other than that, then we have the TGP 16, which Michael again talked about, which was
dropped mainstream, but the Chiro core boot, I think, is based on 4.16.
I think so.
So a lot of other features that were there until 4.16 are merged in.
Core boot changed their release cycle.
So now it's like every three months.
So release are going faster, but it doesn't mean that so much happened in between release.
It's just that the release are going faster.
Power 9 is now supported by core boot.
It's going to be supported inside of ads.
I came in and fuzzed them.
Now I will have the TPM modules to be able to test this at home.
And it will land inside of ads later on.
As opposed to an open source firmware, this is what you would have inside of a closed
source supply chain environment.
So this is complicated.
I'm just doing that as a reference.
Normally you have to have, like I said, the FSP, the Tino core to implement the UFI implementation.
After that, all the companies are doing a little part, and the OEM is actually responsible
for 10% of the code that is there.
So this is true for all computers, but Apple that is there, which is responsible to actually
develop the firmware completely.
And this gives a good posture because they support the hardware longer.
For other firmware, for other company vendors, the firmware is not that long supported.
And we saw it with the X230, which is not maintained anymore.
There is no microcode update.
This kind of stuff is happening for the firmware level.
So on the other side, with ads as an open source firmware, we have completed the BLET
for the platforms that are completely open source.
So the core boot source code is auditable.
The Linux kernel is auditable.
You can see the source code for that version, plus the configuration that is pushed inside
of ads.
We depend on Linux tools only to do the magic of ads.
So basically, you have module dependencies.
You will see links later on to actually go directly and source code to see where the
modules are and what they do.
And this permits us to have really streamlined policy, which is right now GUI init inside
of ads, and GUI init is responsible to take Linux as init and then point directly in the
policy that you want.
The reason why Trimone did this is because anybody here that could want the policy, which
is basically a bash script, to do something else, could do it and customize it super easy.
Bash is easy to read and understand, as opposed to compiling stuff.
Sometimes the tools are there, basically your policy is just saying, OK, I want to show
this.
And when you click that, it does that.
So for developers, it's easy to review and see and collaborate as well.
So the small note that I put there is that the reason why Linux is really interesting
inside of a firmware is that you can reduce the size of the kernel to only do what you
want it to do.
So on ads, it's a really small kernel, like only containing what is needed to initialize
the platform outside of Corebook.
And since we are able to also build models, we can support, for example, USB, as storage,
as model.
And then when we need storage from a USB, we call it on demand.
So we load the modules.
We measure the modules, and after that, we load them.
And the same thing for a USB keyboard.
If you don't need a USB keyboard, it should not be there.
So that's what happens for laptops.
That permits to remove a complete old class of attacks, because if you don't have USB
keyboard and you don't have HID as a driver, then you cannot have a rubber-ducky attack,
simply because the kernel drivers are not there.
So you can reduce the stack, the get-attack surface as needed as well.
So this is it.
So here we are going to talk about Linux as a bootloader.
What is a bootloader real quick?
It's what is between the firmware and the OS to actually parse configuration and boot
inside of it.
Sorry, my mouth is dry.
I'm not used to the conference anymore.
So yeah, if you use the kernel as a bootloader, then you're able to bypass completely C bias
or grub as we see normally.
So if you have Linux, again, and you have scripts, you're able to parse the grub configuration
and you're able to display it and boot inside of it.
And the Linux tools that are there are actually the basic ones that are needed.
So we have Busybox, we have Crip Setup, LVM, the TPM tool stack, and Wiptail, and FBM
with tail, which permits us to have something like that.
So once you're having an operating system installed, and if you don't have an operating
system installed, Edge will detect that nothing is on the hard drive and will propose you
to boot from a USB disk.
And that USB disk could be just plain ESO and the detached signature if the distribution
is providing that.
And you can verify the ESO prior of booting inside of it.
Again, it's Crip.
We can do whatever we want.
So that's what we can do.
Year in action is the main policy that is there.
Like I said, everything inside of ESOS right now is based on one policy, which is GUI init.
It's not really clear.
So basically up here, what you see is that the normal boot policy is GUI init.
Basically we're mounting the slash boot in read-only.
We're verifying here because since we have an open source, we have Linux and the tools,
we're based on GPG to stack to be able to actually first when you own the platform,
you inject your public key.
If you don't have a public key and private key, you have to have a USB GPD smart card.
And Edge will say, OK, please inject your public key.
And if you don't have one, it will help you to own your USB smart card.
Once this is done, the public key will be injected inside of the firmware.
And that permits us to actually sign the content of slash boot.
So here what you see is that it was signed with my key.
So all the content of slash boot is verified.
The default boot configuration is also signed.
So it's verified prior of jumping inside of it.
So all you see there is the verification of the content prior of trusting it.
And once this is done, it asks us for the TPM disk unlock key.
I think I will cover that later.
But this is an example of what can happen.
Our recent change inside of Edge is that instead of trying to craft a cryptad entry,
we extract the initrd to see what the operating system is trying to do.
There are some operating system that we're implementing, for some reason,
two cryptads.
So instead of trying to craft one, we copy the form of what is expected
by the operating system.
And we just inject inside of it the place where the secret is supposed to be.
The TPM will unseal the secret if all the measurements are good.
So the firmware is good.
After that, if the drivers loaded are the same as when we sealed the secret inside
of it, it verifies also that the looks header is exactly the same.
And if all of those things are as expected, an additional initrd is created,
including the cryptad in question.
And the secret.
And this is passed to the initrd of the operating system.
So we're able to actually boot inside of an operating system without typing
your passphrase from a boot prompt that you don't know if you should trust or not.
So Edge is trustable because everything is measured.
It has tested to you.
And then you can type your passphrase there because you're trusting it.
So that's basically what we can see.
I have laptops here if you want to talk later on.
The demo that is there real quick is something that I can launch on my laptop.
I acted last week to be able to present it right now.
But you can have a flat partition with Iso inside of it.
Now you can just say, OK, media scan.
You point it to the partition containing your Iso in question.
It will ask you what Iso you want to boot.
Tails provides detached signatures.
So basically at that point, what you see is again, it's verifying the Iso
with the detached signature that guarantees the authenticity of the Iso
and the integrity.
Once that is done, it provides you a list of the grub entries that are there.
You select it.
And at that moment, you see the boot options that were passed inside
of the grub configuration.
And at that point, a minute later, you're inside of Tails.
So it permits you to actually sign Iso that you did yourself.
You created yourself.
Any live Iso that you have, once you verify the integrity of it,
you sign it with your key because you already have it.
And at that point, you can guarantee that a USB drive that you have with multiple Iso
will be bootable whenever you want.
And in that case, it permits you to boot inside of Tails.
And Tails guarantees you that microindumization will be done.
It's in the memory.
So if you're in an emergency situation or you're in a coffee that you don't trust,
you remove your battery.
You work as you want to.
And at last minute, you just unplug your power cable.
And there is nothing in memory anymore.
You left no trace.
You did what you had to do.
And that's really important for a lot of customers.
And this is one of the most important features of Eds.
It permits you to guarantee that what you're going to boot inside
is going to be as expected.
So I covered that already.
Linux Journal, Linux ID, it contains the standard Linux tools that we need.
And the policy is what is responsible to fixate the user experience.
As a development system, most of your people are developers.
This is a slide pointing exactly in what you should be looking at if you're interested
into contributing or customizing it for yourself.
One of the good things that we have right now is that we produce runs for the platforms
that we support.
So every time that there is a commit made inside of Eds, CircleCI is actually watching
the repository.
And it builds all the runs for all the platforms with different cache systems and everything.
I won't cover that today.
But this is what is cool.
If there is just a change in the policies, the runs will be created inside of five minutes
if we have cache of what was built before.
And that's it.
It contains the ash as well.
Sorry, it's cut at the bottom.
But each run that is produced contains ash of everything that was built.
And it's supposed to be reproducible.
There's funding to make sure that Eds is back as being reproducible.
John Mollison is helping me on that.
It will come in the next year as well.
Why Eds? I think I covered it already.
The main problem that we have with proprietary firmware is that there is duplication of code
in multiple parts.
So we're trying to recreate the wheel.
And the idea behind Eds is that we should not do that if we have already a kernel that
permits us to drive the hardware that we want.
So instead of duplicating at that part here, the drivers to be able to drive the graphics,
to be able to control your keyboard, the bus and everything, the kernel is able to do it
and does it really efficiently.
Another reason why we love dealing with the kernel instead is that we can control the
IOMMU directly at the moment that the kernel is launched from Core Boot.
So at that moment, if we specify that we want to have the graphic card not having the IOMMU
because we're going to boot inside of CubesOS, for example, it can be defined there and it's
going to be properly set up for us.
Okay, 10 minutes.
Yeah, so again, links here if you want to click.
The policy that we use, as I said, is during it right now.
I will cover that more in details later on.
And one of the important changes, I will cover it in what is new in the next slide, is that
we have maximized ROM, maximized ROM or actually complete, it's a valid complete ROM.
It includes Intel ME, it includes an unlike IFD, it includes Core Boot and the packed
kernel.
So the image that are there inside of circle CI as artifacts are actually externally flashable.
We create like top and bottom image.
So if, for example, the X230, when you open it up, there's two SPI chips that you need
to reprogram externally.
Once that is done, you can update internally.
Flash ROM is inside of Edge as well, so you have control and you're able to upgrade as
you want.
Why Edge?
There's extensive TPM usage.
The reason why we like Edge is that there is two sealed secrets inside of the TPM.
The first one is happening the first time that you flash your firmware and it's sealing
like all the measurements that are created from Core Boot.
Core Boot is configured to be in measured boot mode and it extends the TPM, PCR to a
PCR.
Everybody knows what PCRs are in TPM basically.
So all the measurements are being done in the PCR2 from the Core Boot part.
And after that, when Edge starts, when the payload is actually loaded, which was measured
inside of the PCR2, Edge extends a couple of other PCRs which are then used to make
sure that the integrity of the runtime environment is actually the same as expected.
So the first sealed secret when you flash your firmware, the next time you're going
to reboot it, Edge will say, okay, you either don't own the TPM, so you have to own it,
or otherwise it will say, okay, we have a couple of measurements that were provided
by Core Boot in measured boot mode, so we have to seal them.
When you seal them, it will create a QR code which you can scan on your phone, or if you
have like a NutriKey Pro or a Librium key and you use like the HOTP version of the firmware,
it will ask you to seal that secret as well inside of your USB security dongle.
So at that point, you have the measurements of the PCR4, 5, no, it's another slide, sorry.
No, it's not another slide.
So basically you have like the measurements of PCR0123 and 4 that will be like inside
of the first sealed secret which guarantees like the attestation of the firmware.
So you boot your machine, you plug your USB key, it will flash green if the measurements
are good from the firmware alone.
And after that, if you set the default boot configuration, you're actually using all the
other PCR measurements to seal the secret plus the LUX header that is extracted because
we have Crip set up.
And you're going to seal it with a passphrase that you define at that moment, at the moment
of sealing the secret.
So when you're booting, it's what I showed you before like in the other screen that was
here, when it's asking you to type your passphrase, it's making sure that all the measurements
of the PCRs are exactly the same in an attempt of unsealing the secret inside of the TPM.
So at that point, either if your password is bad or the measurements are bad, as will
just refuse to boot your system.
And it will say to you PCR mismatch and at that point you should be worried and investigate.
So that's it for that.
Why is it important?
Because yeah, the secrets that are sealed inside of the TPM memory are actually making
you sure that you're in the state that you expect prior of typing a passphrase.
We're used of typing passphrase in weird environment.
This is an environment that is trusted.
So at that point, like anything that you do inside of ads and that opens the door like
to add more feature will work as defined.
I will go faster because I have only five minutes.
The reason why maximize boards are important is actually that on a OEM version of the firmware,
this is what we have.
The Intel IFD is locked.
The IFD is basically the description of the region inside of the firmware as defined there.
And EMI is also locked.
So if you want to take advantage of all the firmware space that is there to add tools,
you have to unlock the IFD and you have to unlock EMI.
So the reason why the maximized, this is a configuration of the maximized board.
This is the extraction that we have here of the important part.
So flash run here like on the legacy board or if you're coming from IV rain for those
who are interested in that project is that you can only flash the BIOS region.
And the BIOS region is only having eight megabytes by default on the legacy or the OEM version.
So if we externally flash and we nurture any, we're getting more than four megabytes additional.
So if we add that inside of the bias region, we're having like 11.5 or nearly 12 megabytes
of usable space where we can add more feature.
We could even add Python there if we wanted, which is something that I want for a really
long time.
So this is what it looks when it's modified.
Actually you see that the bias region is equivalent like of XBE4FFF.
So basically it's near of 12 megabytes.
Yeah, I covered that.
Basically, the reason why we love it for the redistribution, the issue that we have on
blood redistribution is that inside of the Edge repo, we always the scripts.
The scripts are being called by CircleCI to actually download the images from Lenovo.
We extract them directly on the CI.
We're about to extract ME from there.
We're about to nurture ME from there.
And then CircleCI is responsible to build Corboot, use the module that we extracted,
validated and everything.
And from that moment, we're able from a simple script like that to build a complete run image
and we just dodge the legal issues.
So whatever CircleCI is building like that, I gave it as an example here, provides like
artifacts.
This is a build from CircleCI.
This is like the output of Corboot, which was able to stitch everything together.
And at the end of the build, you have the image I was talking about.
So you have the 12 megabyte full image that is internally flashable.
And you have two images for each commit, which are there provided by the CircleCI for 30
days after the moment of the build.
And that permits you to externally flash and then it permits you to internally flash forever
after.
The OEM was...
Sorry, the Whiptail support is for either servers and BMC.
So it would be usable on the KTP 16.
This is what it would look like from a remote serial connection.
So if you're connected on the BMC remotely, this is exactly what you would see.
The HOTP card dongle could be in your server and the TOTP is what you could check remotely
if the time is good.
And then you have the same option, but console based.
This is what we see if we're having graphical frame buffer on laptops and desktop.
The OEM factory reset, OEM factory reset ownership wizard was upstream.
So it looks like that, asking you what you want to do, giving you options that are really
important if it's not you who have installed your operating system.
This is what I pushed forward because if you don't install your operating system yourself,
then the LUX encryption key could be intercepted.
So you want to reencrypt the content of your drive.
And once again, since we have Unix, we can do that directly inside of it.
You will have like to look at that for yourself.
I won't have time to cover that, but this is what it is.
And the main thing that is really nice for developers is that we now have QMU and QVM
supports with software TPM support.
So all the images, mostly all of the images that I provided were taken from the QMU version.
This is what it looks like when you build it.
So you can inject your key and then after that you can run it.
That's how it looks.
And then you can have your recovery shell directly from the terminal and you will see
the output of WithTale and you can develop and test as you go.
And this is what next.
I'm sorry I won't be able to cover it directly, but I gave link on everything that the work
is happening right now.
TPM2 support is coming, so new boards will be able to have it.
Clean room, GPD key generation is the next thing I'm working on to be able to remove
the need of having your USB security dongle because people want to test it but don't necessarily
want to buy any tricky, which was a problem before.
Right protection is coming, so if you want to look at this and poke me there or any question,
SPI right protection was developed by Triem Dev.
It is now in the PR that is supposed to be merged in the next couple of days when I will
have a time.
International keyboard support will come because right now it's just US keyboard, which is
a problem for a lot of people.
And randomization of the MAC address will be possible directly in the GB partition inside
of Elz and being reflashed.
And this is it folks.
Reference.
I really recommend to watch the original talk on Elz if you have more in-depth questions
because the background didn't change and that's it.
Thank you.
Do we have time for questions?
You said the Talus 2 platform supported?
The question is does the Talus 2 have a TPM chip?
There was a connector that was a really big adventure.
I will try to make it really short.
The port was done like with Triem Dev here and actually there is a TPM connector but
it was not working properly.
So we had like to do research to be able to actually make it work on the pen-out.
But yes, there is no TPM inside because it's against their mentality but you can connect
one but it will be the one that you buy from Triem Dev because...
So you have to add a TPM chip?
You have to add a TPM chip.
But it's available from their shop.
Another question?
Do you do remote attestation if you don't or are you interested in it?
It's something that I don't have.
Do you do remote attestation?
Actually Volbut did it.
Volbut is actually a fork of Elz.
I'm looking into upstreaming the code but I would say that any person that is interested
into that kind of feature, I would guide you to see what they did because they have approval
concept that is really interesting on the Raspberry Pi for remote attestation and there
is a board config for Corboot there as well and everything is there.
It's just trying to upstream but I'm not against it.
But Elz as of right now is more targeting users to actually own and being able to verify
for themselves.
But remote attestation...
Remote attestation server running on your phone via Bluetooth.
Okay.
So the question here would be like is remote attestation possible?
Yes, someone is suggesting to do it remotely on the phone.
It would be totally possible.
Please contact me.
Another question maybe?
No?
Sorry for this dense presentation.
Next presentation I will be better.
Thank you everybody.